1957,
the world has stopped to listen.
Somewhere above, something is speaking.
The airwaves are flooded with a
persistent beep.
Most have no idea what it looks like,
let alone what it's capable of.
Rumors spread and fears circulate.
[music]
There are questions that will take
decades to answer,
but most know only one [music] thing.
It was sent by the Soviet Union.
This is the story of Earth's first
artificial [music] satellite.
This is the story of the genius design
of Sputnik and the tragic engineer who
built it.
World War II is over. The explosive
birth of the atomic age has sparked
growing tensions between the United
States and the Soviet Union.
Divided between political and economic
ideology,
negotiations start, stop, stall, and
deadlock.
The superpowers are on the brink of
nuclear war,
but the International Council for
Science decides to set out a bold vision
for the decade.
The International Polar Year first began
in the late 1800s. It was a year-long
international scientific exchange to
study the Earth's poles.
The next one had run 50 years later.
However, that had fallen between two
World Wars, [music]
wars that had yielded a vast crop of new
scientific instruments.
Rockets once aimed at cities could now
be turned to the atmosphere.
A broad scientific experiment to study
the Earth itself and hopefully promote
and foster mutual trust.
It was the time for satellites.
The project was renamed the
International Geophysical Year,
IGY. [music]
Altogether, it would represent tens of
thousands of scientists and dozens of
countries,
>> [music]
>> a truly global exchange and effort.
It would run for 18 months, from July
1st, 1957 to December 31st, 1958.
The greatest scientific [music] research
program ever undertaken, but it was off
to a rocky start.
In the middle of the Cold War, the IGY
was a rare [music] opportunity for
international unity.
But for the Soviet Union and the United
States, it became a race.
It required little imagination to move
from watching satellites to transporting
nuclear missiles [music] around the
globe.
In the Soviet Union, the satellite
effort was [music] spearheaded by a
group at the special design bureau,
OKB-1.
It was headed by figures only known by
their titles.
Chief designer of rocket space,
chief designer of rocket engines, chief
theoretician [music] of cosmonautics.
It would be decades until their
identities were known.
This was intentional.
The country's ideology rejected
attributing efforts of a group to single
individuals.
It also served practical [music]
security purposes.
Many feared that if their identities
were public, they could be assassinated
by the CIA.
Even cosmonauts working under him often
didn't know the last name of their chief
[music] designer.
A man who despite his loyalty and
engineering brilliance had spent much of
World War II in prison.
Sergei Pavlovich Korolev had been caught
up in the wake of Stalin's Great Purge.
[music]
He had been arrested, beaten, and forced
into a false confession of treason and
sabotage.
From there, he was shuffled between
prison and Kolyma, a notorious Siberian
gulag.
He was then transferred to Sharashka, a
labor camp for scientists with improved
living conditions.
The transfer saved his life.
In a short time, severe mistreatment and
malnutrition by the communist regime had
taken their toll.
He had lost all of his teeth, his jaw
had been broken, and had suffered a
heart attack.
Injuries that would haunt him for the
rest of his life.
Near the end of the war, he was
released. The ordeal had not dampened
his loyalty or passion for work.
So, he was drawn into the post-war
development of satellites.
But across the ocean, the United States
announced plans to do the same.
A launch of a satellite for the IGY.
There was a sense of immediate urgency.
If the Soviets could still beat them to
space, it would secure their supremacy
in the race.
So, the government agreed.
However, the relatively cheap scientific
endeavor was not a priority for a
government investigating ICBMs.
Immediately, Korolev's team ran into a
problem.
The ambitious satellite they'd been
planning, codenamed Object [music] D,
was enormous.
700 lb of scientific equipment.
It was an entire scientific laboratory
built to study the Earth's ionosphere,
magnetic field, the Sun, and even cosmic
rays.
The project fell behind schedule. Too
many unknowns and too little precedent
for the satellite's pressurized shell or
communication with the instruments on
board.
The launch window slipped from 1957 to
1958, well into the IGY and past the
ever-looming American launch.
And then it got even worse.
News came from the United States of a
launch out of Cape Canaveral. A missile
launch had been mistakenly reported as a
failed launch of an American satellite.
Time was closing in.
The R-7 engines chosen for their launch
were not living up to the heavy Object
D.
They were falling behind.
When I was in high school, I remember
listening to stories about space in my
headphones when I worked at a summer
job.
It was slow work. I had to package
jewelry. Someone cut out small pieces
from metal sheets, bent them, placed two
of them on a sleeve, and then they were
packaged by me.
But my boss thought this was
inefficient.
Hours spent by workers bending little
pieces of metal.
So, he gave me a task.
What if we could make a mold? We could
press the jewelry into a shape with only
a lever.
So, he let me play around with a 3D
printer and learn to model.
I made the presses. They failed.
And it would take hours for the next
print to come again.
But that printer is the reason I learned
to model.
It's the reason this YouTube channel
even exists.
But a lot of things have changed in the
world of 3D printing since.
I'm in an office where we have now two
P2Ss running 24/7.
Printing parts for warehouse robots in
the Netherlands.
The machine I had back then was a
nightmare compared to what Bambu Lab is
making today.
The P2S just works.
And it works cheaply and extremely fast.
No leveling, no guessing, no
babysitting.
If a worse machine got me here, I'm
genuinely curious what kids messing
around with this today are going to
build. Link in the description.
Each new report sent a new wave of
anxiety through Korolev and his team.
He had no way to know that the United
States' own program was being stalled,
plagued by its own political obstacles.
The IGY would begin within months, and
they were no closer to a satellite.
But at the end of 1956, Mikhail
Tikhonravov, Korolev's personal friend
and the chief designer of the
satellite's rocket, made a suggestion.
What will make satellite little lighter?
30 kg or so, or even lighter.
After some hesitance, Korolev agreed.
Object D was shelved. Work began on the
new quote simple satellite under lead
designer Mikhail Kholobanov and his
deputy Oleg Ivanovsky. The term for
satellite in Russian roughly translates
to the traveling companion of the world.
The long phrase Sputnik Zemli was
shortened.
The satellite itself didn't have a
unique name.
Instead, the new craft went by the name
Prosteyishy Sputnik, PS-1, or simple
satellite.
Eventually, it was shortened again to
just Sputnik 1.
The outer metallic heat shields were
made up of two hemispheres of an
aluminum alloy, each 2 mm thick.
The The were sealed together
by 36 bolts and resin o-rings,
58 cm in diameter.
It was about the size of a large beach
ball, but weighed 83.6 kg.
The hollow carapace would protect the
equipment mounted within. Three
silver-zinc batteries made up more than
half the mass of the craft,
51 kg.
The batteries powered a D-200 radio
transmitter.
The transmitter operated at 20 and 40
MHz.
By alternating between each frequency,
it produced a distinctive beep beep.
The signal was then passed along to the
top hemisphere of the craft.
The thermal protective shield was 1 mm
thick, and attachments held four
antennas in place,
two sets of antennas, one for each
frequency.
One 2.4 m long and the other 2.9 m.
The spherical shape had won out over the
original design. The senior designers
had preferred a conical shape. They
argued it would fit better in the nose
of the launch vehicle.
However, spherically, it could more
evenly reflect heat from the sun.
This would be important to help keep the
radio equipment shielded from
overheating. Solar radiation and heat
resistance was expected to cook the
small metallic instrument.
Inside, a remote switch to control the
thermal and barometric switches sat
beneath the transmitter.
If the temperature rose or fell too far,
the cooling fan would automatically be
triggered to circulate the enclosed
nitrogen in zero gravity.
Finally, it was sealed and pressurized
to 1.3 atmospheres.
Object D had been plagued by unreliable
subcontractors,
so the team was devoted to keeping the
development in-house.
They only relied on two outside
organizations,
one for the onboard batteries and the
other for the radio transmitter.
It was an austere, pristinely polished
spherical body, reminiscent of natural
celestial bodies,
the symbol of a new era.
But simply put, it was a radio with very
thin heat shields. Korolev had an
all-consuming passion for his work,
quick to anger and prone to shouting.
During construction, he kept Sputnik 1
spotless.
It was elevated on a special stand and
draped in velvet. It was more than just
patriotic pride. Once launched, he knew
a reflective surface would make it
easier for observers to spot.
The launch was scheduled for the summer
of 1957, as early as May.
The window would allow them to beat the
slow-moving Americans into orbit.
However, there was still one last
problem.
The rocket.
R-7 rockets have been repurposed from
ICBMs, but the new rockets had yet to
achieve a successful test launch. The
launches were scheduled from Baikonur
Cosmodrome, but the desert steppe was a
rough place to work. The surrounding
areas were barren with little natural
water.
Temperature ranged from -40° F in the
winter to 113° in the summer.
Word workers would sometimes catch
scorpions in jars just to watch them
fight to the death.
The maiden flight of the R-7 came in
May.
It was a short flight. I'd lift off, a
fire broke out. It engulfed one of the
boosters.
The rockets crashed back to Earth less
than a minute and a half later.
A volatile cocktail.
Almost 30 m tall, it ran on kerosene and
liquid oxygen.
June was no better.
Launch after launch was aborted while
the Americans kept building.
The new rocket was permanently grounded
as the entire area was flooded by a
tropical rainstorm.
It never even made it off the ground.
The launch of the next rocket in July
was shorter than the first.
The euphoric successful lift off was
shattered as the vehicle began to roll.
High speeds ripped off the four strap-on
boosters.
It broke up in 32 seconds.
Its debris scattered only a few
kilometers downrange.
One after another, each launch failed.
The hot summer of 1957 crawled forward.
Korolev's health suffered.
As months passed, his dream for a
pre-IGY launch were dashed.
Each failure threatened not only
Korolev's dream of satellites, but his
very position in Russian society.
The charges which had sent him to the
labor camps had only been cleared in the
spring.
The team worked at breakneck pace. They
lived in the shadow of every radio
report or paper which might indicate an
American launch.
Then August came. The fourth launch
began.
The rocket ignited and flew.
It reached target above Kamchatka
Peninsula, 6,500 km away.
The team raced to capitalize on the
success.
The launch was scheduled for October.
First for the 6th, but ever anxious of
an American launch, pushed forward 2
days.
By October 2nd, Sputnik was installed
into its R-7 rocket. It was enclosed
within the metal nose cone.
The rocket was rolled to the launch pad,
escorted by Korolev and members of the
government. Fueling began bright and
early on the 3rd. By the night of the
launch, the launch pad was awash in
enormous floodlights.
At 10:20 p.m., the R-7 ignited its
engines.
The vehicle disappeared under a haze of
smoke and bright light as the engines
shook the ground with 398 tons of
thrust. It climbed fast, 17,400 mph. The
launch was rocky. Delays in the firing
of engines and higher than expected
kerosene consumption almost aborted the
launch. [music]
Back on the ground, the team was blind.
They waited anxiously to hear from the
receiving station.
The R-7 hadn't exploded. They could see
that. But even if the rocket made it to
orbit, what guarantee was there that the
satellite had survived?
With its orbit, it would be a little
over an hour and a half until they knew
anything.
Korolev waited in the command bunker
with senior members of the state
commission. Nearby, a crowd had formed
around the van set up next to the launch
pad. Inside, engineers waited for
confirmation.
96 minutes and 17 seconds later, they
had their answer.
The Baikonur's loudspeakers blared to
life. Everyone could now hear the steady
beeping like a heartbeat from a distant
metallic creature.
To enable continuous transmission, a
Sputnik sent out a signal every 3/10 of
a second.
Then alternating where a pause in one
signal was taken up and transmitted on
the other frequency.
Sputnik 1 had been launched. It was now
free falling into an elliptical
trajectory.
The long antennas that had been folded
back into the rocket during launch were
released. A special spring mechanism
shot the legs out, deploying them to 35°
relative to its body. It raced along
almost 29,000 km/h.
It was nearly parallel with the surface
of the Earth 288 km below. On board, as
the sensor detected separation from the
rocket, the remote switch triggered the
batteries.
Energy flooded the 1-W radio transmitter
and on-board thermal [music] control
system and Sputnik woke up.
Sputnik's elliptical orbit was wide, 250
km at its closest point, 939 km at its
furthest,
and almost 80 km lower than planned.
It flew with an inclination to Earth's
equatorial plane of 65°.
The satellite was slowly losing
altitude, but it was stable.
The team waited.
It was only once it passed over a second
time that they telephoned the leader of
the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev.
However, Khrushchev was subdued about
the news, chalking it up to another
launch.
They had plenty of launches, although a
successful one was nice.
He congratulated the team and went to
bed.
It was impossible for anyone to fully
grasp what was about to happen.
In a single instance, a new era had
begun.
The space age
and the world wasn't ready.
By the morning, the radio announced the
shiny new Soviet moon.
By then, it had already traveled over a
blissfully unaware United States
unnoticed twice.
Sputnik 1 sped around the planet almost
once every hour and a half.
It was the evening of October 4th before
President Eisenhower received the news
on his farm in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
[music]
Initial reactions abroad were positive.
The scientific community was quick to
congratulate the Soviets on their
successful, albeit surprising, launch.
Amateur ham radio operators openly
congratulated their Soviet counterparts
over unapproved international channels.
It wasn't long before sentiment began to
shift.
By Monday, awe was replaced by anger and
fear. Headlines read "Red Moon Over the
US".
All around, the Cold War had rumbled on,
electrifying the air and coloring every
achievement. It had now been less than 2
months since the Soviets had test-fired
the first ICBMs.
The intended psychological effect was in
full effect. In America, it was seen as
akin to Pearl Harbor, albeit with a
threat only implied.
President Eisenhower and his Soviet
counterpart, Khrushchev, were both
caught unprepared for the strength of
the reaction.
Soon, Khrushchev's tune changed. He
exalted Sputnik as a masterful act of
Soviet science and technological
supremacy.
However, Eisenhower assured the American
public he wasn't worried one iota.
America's own satellites were set to
launch soon.
Behind closed doors, Eisenhower was
secretly pleased. He believed the
Soviets had done them a good turn.
Unintentionally, they had established a
new precedent, a precedent that allowed
for orbiting satellites to travel over
nations,
a precedent America would need to launch
their own secret spy satellites.
Unaware, the general public, however,
wasn't comforted.
Sputnik traveled the sky for the first 2
months with its own companion, the shell
of its enormous 30-m 280-ton R-7 rocket.
Together, an alien sight in the sky.
As Korolev intended, Sputnik's polished
shell was easily visible, even with just
the naked eye.
It was best seen at sunrise and sunset
when the sun best reflected off of it.
But even more conspicuous was the
persistent beeping that filled the
airwaves.
Equally thrilling and terrifying, picked
up by both radio amateurs and
professional stations.
It was the first shout from space.
The effect was ominous and unnatural.
The mysterious signal sent agencies
across the United States scrambling to
decode the transmission.
A message in the sky above American
cities speaking in a language they
didn't understand.
A Soviet delegate in Washington had to
eventually reveal the secret.
There was no secret encoded message.
The radio signal was just being used to
track the craft.
It took advantage of radio Doppler where
the pitch of the transmission changed as
it passed.
It took the Soviet Union 5 days to
circulate the first real photo of
Sputnik 1.
The shiny craft was propped upon a
stand, its long antennas trailing behind
it.
By October 13th, Sputnik and its
trailing rocket flew over Manhattan.
Stationed in Central Park, NBC captured
footage of it overhead. Within hours, it
had made its debut on network
television. It was now impossible to
ignore.
Despite its inception as the simple
satellite, Sputnik 1 provided scientists
with priceless data.
Its successful orbit had supported
theories in rocket propulsion and
orbital mechanics.
The survival of its internal instruments
proved their principles of
pressurization, sound.
The simple beeping showed radio
communication was possible. Up to this
point, communication through the upper
layers of the ionosphere had not yet
been proven.
Scientists were even able to gather
information from how the satellite fell.
Falling from its original orbit, Sputnik
provided data on how atmospheric density
changed at different altitudes.
Weeks flew by. While tensions grew,
Sputnik was destined for a short life.
The onboard batteries have been designed
to only last about 2 weeks.
They outlasted expectations, but 22 days
later, the signal was dead.
By November, the death watch had begun.
For 70 days, each orbit brought it
closer to Earth with a quicker and
quicker orbit.
The satellite was slowly being pulled
back to its home planet.
It flew through a denser and denser
atmosphere. The shell began to glow with
incandescent heat.
Only 3 months after its launch, on
January 4th, 1958, Sputnik was gone. It
didn't crash.
The satellite burned up, destroyed on
re-entry into Earth's atmosphere.
After 1,440 revolutions and 92 days in
space,
its life had begun in the bright flash
of rockets, and it died in silence.
It became a bright man-made shooting
star, melting and then burning up in the
air.
Despite being the last-minute
replacement for a more ambitious
satellite, it was still eight times
heavier than anything the United States
had been designing.
Sputnik proved the Soviets had powerful
rockets, [music]
capable of flying high and flying fast.
America's enemies were not so far away
after all.
By the beginning of 1960, the R-7 was
put into service, equipped with nuclear
warheads.
By the summer, the United States
Congress passed the Space Act.
Almost exactly a year after Sputnik 1's
launch, NASA opened its doors for
civilian space efforts.
By the end of December, the
International Geophysical Year ended. It
had been a rousing success, ushering in
a new age of space and technological
innovation. [music]
The stage was set.
The 1960 space race kicked into gear.
Korolev had helped lift the Soviet Union
further and further.
Sputnik 1 was quickly followed by
Sputnik 2,
and its canine cosmonaut, Laika.
Object D finally took flight as Sputnik
3.
And then, the successful flight of Yuri
Gagarin, the first man in [music] space.
But Korolev's own journey came to an
end.
In 1966, while undergoing a routine
operation, he began to hemorrhage. The
doctors attempted to intubate him.
However, [music] they discovered his jaw
had been broken so badly in the gulag
that the pipe could not pass into his
throat.
He died without regaining consciousness.
He was only 59 years old.
The space age continued to march onto
the beat
>> [music]
>> it set almost a decade earlier.
An age that landed humans on the moon
and sent probes to distant planets, and
an age that is once again starting. Here
you go. Here's the center request manual
start override.